Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on the
theme of citizenship and identity.
In part one, today’s episode, we are
going to talk about the case of Italy
and the country’s recent referendum
on easing the rules on citizenship.
In part two, we’ll talk about the
Windrush scandal, a recent British
political scandal in which tens of
thousands of people, mostly from
former British colonies in the
Caribbean, found themselves treated
as outcasts in their own country.
And in part three, we will talk about
the battle between the Mediterranean
island of Malta and the European Union, a
battle for the right to sell citizenship.
OK then, let’s get right into it, and
ask ourselves what makes an Italian.
Now I want to start this episode
by telling you something about me.
It’s not a secret, and I’m
certainly not ashamed of it.
But it’s not something that everyone
knows, and it’s not something
that’s immediately obvious.
It’s not something that you
would guess by looking at me.
would guess by hearing my voice.
It’s not something that you would
guess if I told you about my parents,
my brother and sister, my cousins,
or anything about my childhood.
It’s this: I am Italian.
I have an Italian passport; I am,
legally speaking at least, as Italian
as Giorgio Armani or Sophia Loren.
And in fact, I am more Italian than tens
of thousands of people who were born and
raised in Italy, who speak no language
other than Italian, know no other country
but Italy, but are not Italian citizens.
I have Italian citizenship
through marriage.
My wife is Italian, which allowed
me to become an Italian citizen.
There are a few technicalities to
this–different waiting periods depending
on whether you live in Italy or not,
and whether you have children, and
then you have to pass a language test
and not have a criminal record–but in
my case at least, I was eligible to
become an Italian citizen after three
years of marriage, despite not living
or working in Italy or having any
connection to Italy apart from my wife.
Interestingly enough, for my wife, the
reverse is not true; it is significantly
more difficult and expensive for her
to become a UK citizen than it is
for me to become an Italian citizen.
Now, especially for the Italians
listening to this, you might think this
is perfectly fair, you might think it
is grossly unfair, but it is the law.
As you will know, a country has
the right to set its laws on
who is entitled to citizenship.
At birth, citizenship is typically granted
based either on jus soli, where a child
becomes a citizen of the country they
were born in, or jus sanguinis, where
the child becomes a citizen by blood,
because their mother or father was a
citizen, or some combination of the two.
Most countries in the Americas, like the
US, Mexico and Brazil, prioritise jus
soli, where anyone born in the country is
a citizen, regardless of the citizenship
of their parents, while most European
countries–like Italy and the UK–are
much more restrictive, and prioritise
citizenship through descent; you become a
citizen through ancestry, through blood.
And globally, most countries also offer
some form of pathway to citizenship,
even if you weren’t born in that country
or have no ancestry in that country.
Typically, this is through either
marriage, as it was in my case,
or an extended period of time
spent living in that country.
But there are other ways, such as the
topic we’ll cover in part three of
this mini-series: paying lots of money.
In the case of Italy, the country has
relatively loose restrictions when
it comes to acquiring citizenship
through ancestry or marriage,
but much stricter rules regarding
citizenship through residency.
Or to translate that into plain English,
I was able to become an Italian citizen
after just three years of being married,
but someone who was born in Italy and
had lived in Italy their entire life
but whose parents weren’t Italian
citizens, well unless they had applied
for citizenship between their 18th
and 19th birthdays, they might find
it very difficult to become Italian.
And it was this that was one of the
key focuses of a referendum put to the
Italian public in early June this year.
The referendum actually had 5
questions, with 4 of them relating to
labour laws, but the most important
question was one on citizenship.
The public was asked to vote on whether
the time limit for non-EU citizens
living in Italy to become Italian
citizens should be reduced from 10
years to 5 years, which would bring it
in line with other European countries,
such as France, Germany, and the UK.
Now, as a quick side note, Italy has
quite a strong tradition of holding
referendums, and an equally strong
tradition of those referendums failing to
reach the required turnout rate of 50%.
So they are often used more like
political tools to express unhappiness
at government policy and direction rather
than genuine vehicles of political change.
So, who exactly was pushing
for this referendum?
And perhaps more importantly, why now?
Well, the short answer is: the political
left, trade unions, and a coalition of
pro-immigration and civil rights groups.
Italy, like much of Europe, has seen
significant immigration over the past
30 years, and many of the children of
these immigrants, these second-generation
Italians, have grown up in Italy, speak
only Italian, go to Italian schools, and
consider themselves Italian in every way.
But, in the eyes of the law,
they're not; they are foreigners.
For years, there have been growing
calls to make it easier for these
people to obtain Italian citizenship,
to officially recognise their Italian
identity, not just socially or culturally.
Supporters of the reform argued
that the existing system is unfair
and out of touch with modern Italy.
After all, they say, if someone has
lived in Italy for most of their life,
paid taxes, gone to school, speaks
the language fluently, and calls Italy
home, doesn’t this make them Italian?
And this question of citizenship
has also become wrapped up in
wider debates about Italy’s ageing
population and its future workforce.
The country, as you may know, has
one of the lowest birth rates in
Europe, with 1.24 births per woman,
and hundreds of thousands of young
people leaving for other countries.
Its population is ageing and shrinking,
with a quarter of the population aged
over 65 and just 12% under the age of 14.
Its economy increasingly depends on
migrant labour to keep key sectors
running, everything from agriculture
to elderly care to logistics.
From this perspective, making it easier
for long-term residents and their
children to become citizens isn’t just
a question of fairness, so the argument
goes; it’s also a practical solution
to a looming demographic crisis.
In short, Italy needs more people,
and many argue that it should
start by giving citizenship to
people who are already there.
But, as you might expect,
not everyone agrees.
Opposition to the reform comes mainly
from the right, where political leaders
have consistently argued against any
loosening of the rules around citizenship.
For these parties, citizenship
is not simply an administrative
label, a matter of residency, or
a tool to secure economic growth.
It’s about identity, history,
culture — and, in their eyes, about
protecting what it means to be Italian.
They argue that Italian identity is
something inherited through blood
and tradition, not simply acquired
by living in the country for a few
years and being able to correctly
identify the difference between an
espresso macchiato and a cappuccino.
There’s also the question of control.
Like in much of Europe, in Italy,
immigration has been one of the
most polarising political issues
for years, particularly since the
European migrant crisis of 2015.
The right argues that relaxing
citizenship rules could act as a pull
factor, encouraging more immigration,
and that the system should remain
strict to prevent abuse and protect
the country’s “social cohesion”.
And beyond ideology, there is,
of course, political calculation.
The issue of citizenship
divides public opinion quite
neatly along political lines.
For the right, opposing reforms like
this is a way to mobilise their base,
to present themselves as defenders of
tradition, of the nation, of Italian
values, however you might define those.
And while supporters framed this reform
as modern, inclusive, and pragmatic,
opponents presented it as rushed,
dangerous, and as something that could
erode and dilute Italian identity.
So, what happened?
Well, the referendum, in the great
tradition of Italian referendums, was
declared void after only around 30% of
the eligible population turned up to vote.
Of those who voted, around 65% voted to
reduce the term limit, with 35% voting
against it, but this was to be expected;
the Prime Minister, Giorgia Meloni,
who was one of the major critics of the
proposal, encouraged her supporters to
boycott the referendum, so it was hardly
surprising that more “yes” supporters
turned up to vote than the “no” side.
And anyway, legally, a minimum
turnout of 50% is required for a
referendum to be binding, so the entire
thing was declared null and void.
The result was met with cheers by
Meloni and her supporters on the
right, and with dismay by those who
had campaigned for the referendum,
who were mainly on the political left.
Now, without getting too dragged
into the topic of Italian politics,
I think it’s useful to look at this
referendum and the case of Italy as an
example of the question of citizenship.
What makes one person
Italian and another not?
What does this mean, and what
implications does it have for
the future of the country?
In the case of Italy, the country has
historically had very generous rules
on citizenship by ancestry, by descent.
In other words, there was a strong
preference for the idea that citizenship
is something that is passed down from
generation to generation, not easily
acquired by cultural assimilation.
In fact, until May of 2025,
there were no generational limits
for jus sanguinis citizenship.
Let’s say someone emigrated from Italy in
1861–the year of unification–to America,
and they and all of their descendants
lived in the US, never setting foot in
Italy again and never speaking a word
of Italian, and to make it even more
dramatic, let’s say they renounced
all Italian culture and traditional
Italian food, and to make it even worse,
their favourite pizza was Hawaiian.
Their descendant born in 2011, 150
years later, could, if there was an
unbroken chain of direct relatives
who had claimed Italian citizenship,
also apply for Italian citizenship.
If this sounds theoretical,
it really isn’t.
An estimated 1.2 million people
in Argentina are Italian citizens,
including the President, Javier Milei,
who has never lived or worked in Italy.
Now, contrast this with the
estimated 2.5 million foreigners
who have been living and working
in Italy for more than 5 years.
The recent referendum was about the
question of whether they should have
the right to Italian citizenship, and
indirectly, whether their children
should also become Italian citizens.
To give you an example, let’s say a
couple from China have been living and
working in Rome for the past 9 years.
They have no Italian ancestors or
heritage, but they speak fluent Italian,
they also have a couple of kids who were
born and raised in Italy, and they can
correctly tell you what kind of pasta goes
with what kind of sauce, and they would
never dream of using cream in a carbonara.
If the referendum had passed, the couple
would have been able to apply for Italian
citizenship, and their children could
become Italian, rather than having
to wait until they were 18 to apply.
As you heard, the referendum didn’t
pass; it failed badly, and there
are even suspicions that there will
be another referendum on whether to
raise the limit from 10 to 12 years,
making it even more difficult to
become a citizen by naturalisation.
And of course, Italy isn’t
the only country grappling
with these kinds of questions.
Take Germany, for example.
Up until the year 2000, German
citizenship law was based almost
entirely on jus sanguinis, on ancestry.
But in 2000, things started to change.
Children born in Germany to foreign
parents can now receive German
citizenship, as long as their
parents have been legal residents
for a certain period of time.
And the limit for citizenship by residency
was reduced from 15 years to 8, and in
2024, it was reduced again, to 5 years.
In fact, my sister, who lives
in Germany, is in the process
of becoming a German citizen.
France, for its part, has long operated
under a more inclusive model, with
automatic or semi-automatic citizenship
for children born in France to foreign
parents who have lived in the country.
Even countries like Switzerland, which are
traditionally seen as quite restrictive,
have gradually eased their naturalisation
rules for second-generation immigrants.
Italy, by contrast, has held on tightly
to the idea that citizenship is primarily
something passed down through blood.
And in many ways, this reflects
the country’s own history.
For most of its modern
existence, Italy was a country
of emigration, not immigration.
Millions of Italians left for
North and South America, for
Australia, for parts of Europe.
The Italian state made a conscious
choice to maintain legal ties to these
people and their descendants, even
generations later — hence the extremely
generous rules on citizenship by descent.
But now, as Italy has become a country
of immigration, with millions of people
from Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and
the Middle East settling and raising
children in the country, this old legal
framework is starting to show its cracks.
And at its core, this is a debate
about what citizenship really means.
Is it a legal status passed down
from your ancestors, even if you’ve
never set foot in the country?
Is it a reflection of cultural belonging,
of language, school, work, and daily life?
Or is it something else entirely, a
contract, a symbol of participation, of
being part of a shared national project?
In the case of Italy, these
questions remain unresolved.
And, if the result of the referendum is
anything to go by, they are likely to
remain unresolved for some time to come.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on the question of Italian citizenship.
To everyone, and especially to the
Italians listening, I hope it was
an interesting one and that you
might have learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
What do you think is “the right” way
to define who becomes a citizen or not?
Do I deserve my Italian citizenship,
or is the country handing
out passports too liberally?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
Let me know in the comments below,
if you're listening to this somewhere
where you can comment, and for the
members among you, you can head right
into our community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
And as a final reminder, this is
part one of a three-part mini-series.
Next up we’ll be talking about the
Windrush Scandal, and in part three
we’ll be looking at a country that
wants to keep selling its passports
to the highest bidder, and talk about
Malta’s battle with the European Union.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.